Post GSoC 2023 introductory blog post (#628)
haiku/website: content/blog/zardshard/2023-05-05_[gsoc_2023]_plans_for_improving_icon-o-matic.md

+++
type = "blog"
title = "[GSoC 2023] Plans for improving Icon-O-Matic"
author = "Zardshard"
date = "2023-05-05 14:07:09-04:00"

> tags = ["haiku", "software", "icon-o-matic", "gsoc", "gsoc2023"]

Author: Is the icon-o-matic tag here ok, or should it be spelled differently (e.g. Icon-O-Matic)?

Reviewer: looks like all lowercase is OK for tags

+++

Icon-O-Matic is the editor for HVIF files, the format that Haiku's icons are in. It's a relatively simple but impressive aplication. It does have room for improvement, however.

> There are three things I am planning to do during GSoC: fix bugs, refactor the code, and improve the UI. There is a list of known bugs that Icon-O-Matic has over on [Trac](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?component=%5EApplications%2FIcon-O-Matic&status=assigned&status=in-progress&status=new&status=reopened&order=priority&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=type&col=priority&col=milestone&col=component). You can help, too, by reporting bugs in Icon-O-Matic over there. Less obviously, you can also vote for tickets that you would like to be resolved. To do this, click on the ticket that interests you, then click one of the buttons highlighted by the arrow: ![The buttons are in the upper-right hand corner among the navigation links](/files/blog/zardshard/trac_upvoting.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three things I am planning to do during GSoC: fix bugs, refactor the code, and improve the UI. There is a list of known IOM bugs over on [Trac](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?component=%5EApplications%2FIcon-O-Matic&status=assigned&status=in-progress&status=new&status=reopened&order=priority&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=type&col=priority&col=milestone&col=component). You can help, too, by reporting bugs in Icon-O-Matic over there. Less obviously, you can also vote for tickets that you would like to be resolved. To do this, click on the ticket that interests you, then click one of the buttons highlighted by the arrow: ![The buttons are in the upper-right hand corner among the navigation links](/files/blog/zardshard/trac_upvoting.png)
```

Author: I don't think abbreviating IOM is necessary here. If it were said too often, then I would want to abbreviate it.

## My current plans

Here are the plans that I currently have. As with all plans, they are subject to change.

### Add reference images

A feature that would be very nice for Icon-O-Matic to have is reference images. People have asked for this in [bug #2748](https://dev.haiku-os.org/ticket/2748) and [bug #8758](https://dev.haiku-os.org/ticket/8758).

> ### Add previews to shapes

Reviewer: Do you mean "Paths"?
I don't quite know what your target is here.
Either you create a new Path, and start clicking into the canvas to set points etc. While you're creating the pth, you see its line. Only when you deselect the path object, it becomes invisible.
Or you create a shape+path+style. Then you select the Path and start setting points etc. While you do that, the shape evolves in the new style. As this can be awkward sometimes, One can add a Stroke as Transformer to only have an outline.

Reviewer 2: Previews of the shapes directly in the shapes list would be interesting, I think Wonderbrush (which is essentially a larger and more complete version of Icon O Matic) does this for layers.

Previews of colors and gradients in the styles list would also be nice to have.

Author: No, I mean the shapes listed in the shapes menu. If, for example, you were trying to find out which shape makes the nozzle of the spray can of the debugger icon, you can use the previews to find a black circle. Then, you can click on it to see if it is the black circle you wanted. From there, the path and the style are highlighted, and you can adjust either as you see fit.

Author: Just saw pulkomandy's comment. Yes, I think previews for the styles and maybe even for the paths would be nice.

Reviewer: I misunderstood. Yes. Previews in the lists would be nice!
I think all comments have been addressed. Let's merge.

Being able to see how a shape looks can help speed up navigation significantly.

### Improve conversion from SVG to HVIF

> This would allow using more complete tools like Inkscape to create the vector files. This one is tentative. I haven't looked into whether this can be improved much, and it is likely a very hard problem since SVGs are a very complicated format.

Reviewer 2: The import is based on libsvgtiny, which works quite well for the "tiny" profile of SVG. It works quite well if you know its limitations. People tend to hit problems when they attempt to import an existing SVG file which was not designed with Icon-O-Matic and the HVIF format limitations in mind.

But, that's not necessarily something we want to support. At some point, the vector data gets so large and complex that we should instead store bitmaps in a compressed format instead. But that's a project for another time.

(not necessarily anything to change in the blogpost here, we can discuss this when the time comes to work on it)

### Allow grouping shapes

Being able to group shapes would be helpful in organizing them.

### Switch the code to using `BReferences`

Currently, `BReferenceable` is used directly. This has the potential to lead to bugs when one forgets to acquire/release the reference. This is the source of one of the bugs I fixed in https://review.haiku-os.org/c/haiku/+/6182.

### Get code out of the Icon library

> Currently, icon-o-matic's source is split across two directories: src/apps/icon-o-matic and src/libs/icon. The latter is the icons library. It is, however, littered with `#ifdef ICON_O_MATIC`'s, which isn't very appropriate for a library to do!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Icon-O-Matic's source is split across two directories: src/apps/icon-o-matic and src/libs/icon. The latter is the icons library. It is, however, littered with `#ifdef ICON_O_MATIC`'s, which isn't very appropriate for a library to do!
```

### Bugfixes

I plan on working on bugs approximately in order of importance. This means bugs that are highly upvoted, on the roadmap for R1, or otherwise feel important will get worked on first.

## Conclusion

> A big thank you to Google for hosting GSoC and all the work they put into it. Were it not for them, I would not be here today. I would also like to thank my mentors, PulkoMandy and Humdinger. You have been doing a great job so far!

Reviewer: Let's not get ahead of ourselves. We may suck. :)

```suggestion
A big thank you to Google for hosting GSoC and all the work they put into it. Were it not for them, I would not be here today. I would also like to thank my mentors, PulkoMandy and Humdinger. Looking forward to working with you!
```
